Battery is not down.
At that time of Mr. Zachary's speech, what was the general attitude about the faculty regarding A&M's progress?
Did you and your friends think we were moving forward, standing still, or what?
Well, essentially, I think we were standing still for a long—Rutter is the first person that really started to move this place forward.
Did—do you remember faculty talk about coeducation and non-compulsory cohort?
Well, after Calhoun had been here a couple years, so this is shortly after I had been here, I
ended up by being the chairman of the Faculty Advisory Council of the College of Engineering.
Oh, talk about that.
And one of the things that we did was propose that we have limited co-education.
It came off unanimously on us.
And we were restrictive on it.
We wanted it for
Wives, daughters, and wives and daughters of the staff.
So it had been fairly restrictive.
Now up till that time, in summer school, women could come, but they couldn't come here during the regular year.
And so we passed this on.
Calhoun passed it on with his approval.
We had an acting president then, I don't know.
He passed it on to the Board of Regents without any recommendation.
And Harrington was chancellor then.
I got a letter directed to me as chairman of
faculty advisory council from Harrington, that essentially said, mind my own damn business.
And that it had not even received a motion to approve.
And a letter went on to tell us to continue to mind our own business.
Describe this, make believe I didn't know John Calhoun.
Describe him as the dean.
What kind of person was he?
What kind of leader was he?
Well, he made some changes.
I think he'd have changes coming up from the faculty.
I think the faculty advisory council was a very useful thing to him.
Did he seem bright and progressive to you all?
Yeah.
The only thing is that when he got to be Vice President, he added too many people to the hierarchy.
But nothing compared to what it is today?
No.
No, I remember Byers when we had, I think, about 30,000 students here when Byers was Vice President.
He says, there's no reason why
The secretary in the first and half time can't manage the academic part of this university, and that's what he did.
Describe, as you all saw it, describe Dr. Calhoun's personality.
Oh, he's a very friendly person.
When I meet him today, he still chats and talks.
In those early days, did he have any energy?
Oh, yeah, yeah.
He had a lot of... Well, he has an interview today.
You bet.
Did he seem bright?
Imaginative?
Well, that you can't tell, because, you know, there's always that conflict between the faculty and the administration.
Because the faculty never thinks the administration is doing anything right anyway.
And you probably had that experience, too.
Oh, yes.
All right.
And then he moved on up to be a vice president or chancellor
Vice president.
And then Fred Benson became dean.
Yeah.
Were y'all still in engineering when he became the dean?
Yes.
Describe Fred Benson as dean.
Well, I think Paul Weaver said it appropriately because he said it to Fred
When you left teaching and research to become a dean, it was just a ruination of a good teacher.
And essentially, I think it's difficult to do both.
And this is one of the problems that I think I had
when I got interested in doing these teacher education programs.
It's hard to do those and do research to, and I did it for a while.
When did you begin that?
Well, the first research I did was shortly after the first teacher program I had.
I had a project with Lawrence Radiation Lab that ran up through about three years, through 63.
It had to do with
the use of nuclear explosives for engineering projects, and they worry about radioactive contamination of the ground and groundwater.
And for that time, that was a considerable amount of money running into a couple hundred thousand dollars a year, which translated to nowadays
up there in the millions.
But that was, during that period was the same period that I was instrumental in getting two blacks admitted to the university in the Summer Institute program.
Please describe that as fully as you can.
Well,
Coleman-Lloyd.
When was it?
Do you remember?
It was in 63.
Okay.
The applications were coming in, and you generally got your grant in January.
The applications would come in in about March.
And Coleman-Lloyd, in looking at the applications, and we had programs in earth science
in probably biology and chemistry and physics and math.
So we had about five programs here on the campus.
So they had a special office set up called the NSF Programs Office that helped to coordinate at all these things.
Now was Coleman the coordinator in that office?
Yeah.
Okay.
It eventually got combined with the Office of University of Research later on.
And then as the programs died out, because Sputnik is the thing that started that.
But anyway, he said, in looking at the applications, he says, we're getting a lot of applicants that are black.
And up to that time, we hadn't admitted black students.
Now, these were school teachers?
School teachers.
Because they, generally, if you, in those days, you looked at where they graduated.
Because if they graduated from a typical black school, you'd figure they were black also.
And so then you wouldn't admit them.
So we...
So Coleman said we ought to have a meeting with Rudder on this, talk about it.
And so I don't know whether it was I or Coleman made arrangements with Rudder.
I don't remember, Rudder had an assistant that was retired from the military.
Dorsey McCrory.
Yes, that's right, Dorsey McCrory.
He used to live across the street from me.
So I got with him, and I told him, get with Rudder ahead of time and prime him about what this is about.
So I told him.
Now, when we walked in the meeting, I said to Dorsey, did you get a chance to talk to Rudder?
He says, no.
So we had this confrontation then.
where we talked about this, and we thought we were going to get hit by NAACP, and we didn't want them.
And of course, I said, well, we ought to admit blacks.
And Rudder said, Schroeder, don't you think I'm doing a good job running this university?
I says, yes, you are.
But Kennedy, the Attorney General, is going to tell you what to do in this case.
And the meeting, well, broke up then.
Now, I went and got ahead of Wayne Hall.
Vice President of Academic Affairs.
Yeah, he was, well, before that, he'd been Dean of the Graduate College.
Yes, yes.
And I said,
I sent a letter, actually, to him.
He said, I'm going to send you a letter.
Because in those days, you know, you could talk to people on this campus.
You didn't have to go through a secretary.
Back as the head of fiscal affairs, whenever I had a proposal, I always used to take it over.
And he'd already talked to me several times about other proposals.
He said, does this fit everything?
I said, yes.
I'll say, I'll sign it.
Nowadays, I want to look at it.
So it's impossible to get a proposal off this campus.
And let's go back to this.
Well, I talked to Fred Manson and- Wait, what was Hall's reaction to the idea?
Wayne Hall.
Was he positive?
No.
Well, what had happened, I told Wayne Hall that he was going to have to—if I wasn't going to be able to pick who I wanted to, he was going to have to pick the participants of my summer institute.
The administration was going to have to do.
So I talked to Shirley Lynch, and Shirley Lynch and I went over and talked to Fred Benson.
And Fred said, well, isn't the law so you can't do this?
We have to admit anybody?
He says, didn't they know that when they signed this proposal up there?
Well, I said, yes.
Okay.
You write a letter with a list of all the participants' names through Shirley Lynch, through me, to Wayne Hall, and I'll assign it and prove it all the way.
So, that's what we did.
And so when it was getting about two weeks had passed, I phoned and talked to Wayne, and I said, all right, when are you going to select my participants?
And he said, you are going to select them.
That means I can select whoever I want, regardless of race?
He said yes.
So I said, I will pick some from Texas,
that know the mores of this state so that we don't have any problems.
And as a result, a fellow named Bernal Jackson was
selected from here and somebody might have, I think it was Collins from Fort Worth was selected.
Those are the two black students?
Two black students.
Now you said Vernal Jackson from here?
Yeah, Brian.
Oh.
Yeah, and the Eagle unfortunately got word of this and said he'd been admitted to the university.
And his name was such, Arnold Jackson, his address was so-and-so, and his telephone number was so-and-so.
And when I saw that in the paper, I said, oh, brother, that is an invitation to harassment.
But nobody phoned him.
Hmm.
Now, and these were people, high school teachers with a baccalaureate.
High school or middle school.
Yeah, and they had a baccalaureate degree at least.
Yeah.
And this was a summer course for graduate credit.
Graduate credit, right.
All right, describe how the course went with them in it.
Well, uh.
The thing is that we had meteorology and oceanography being taught that term, so I wasn't directly involved in the course.
However, the program was set up so that we had a five-day field trip involved that everyone was on.
We spent three days in Oklahoma, two nights in a hotel, except the hotel wouldn't take the blacks.
They made an arrangement to put them out in a boarding house.
And then this— Where in Oklahoma was that?
Ardmore.
In Ardmore?
Okay.
And so the second night, the hotel owner said to me, we'll bring them back in.
that I might as well integrate this hotel.
Because you remember in those days, if you were black and wanting to travel across, say, the country, you couldn't find any place to stay at night.
True, true.
And the first, well, Holiday Inn was the first one to start to do it.
They made it into general policy.
did y'all have in any way, with the participants in the class, did y'all have any awkwardness?
No.
Any incidents?
And as you ate on this field trip?
Well, let's put it this way.
The best restaurant in downtown Ardmore,
I had already walked in with a group, and two blacks were walking in, and the restaurant owner said, you can't be admitted.
And Clay Seward was right behind him.
Now, Clay Seward is a native Texan, was raised on the Seward Plantation.
And when he grew up, the only children he had to play with were the sons and daughters of slaves that had been on that plantation in the early days.
Black children and white children playing together.
And so he said, you see all of those 30 people that have just walked in?
You want their business?
That's all he said.
The fellow said, okay.
So we integrated a hotel and this.
Later on, I integrated some other hotels across Texas, too.
Some of them were pretty reluctant, but I told them that they had to do it.
You mean in other summers?
Yeah.
Similar classes?
How did, in terms of the academics, was there any problem that those students had in the summer class at all?
One student had some problems with one of the courses, but other students
See, we used to teach astronomy and oceanography and meteorology and geology, or science, we called it.
So, these would alternate, and we generally have
two courses the first six weeks and two the second.
And some people were admitted for both terms and some for the first six weeks and some for the second, depending upon their background.
So, no, I had more problems probably later on.
There was a general tendency
among some of the blacks to not want to outdo any other black in the class.
So as a result, you can see what that would do to grades.
Did you ever speak to any of the black students about that to try to?
No.
That summer where those first two were,
Were there any black students enrolled anywhere else that summer at A&M?
Yeah, there was one student from Prairie View that needed some other courses he could get here.
And when he saw it in the paper, he'd come up to see if they'd admit him for the summer.
So there were three.
And there were three.
So there were two in my program and one undergraduate.
Okay.
Because I think it was the next summer
that we had a number of Army enlisted men sent here by the Department of the Army, and that then began integration generally.
But I think that was then.
Did you, and you had women in these summer courses, of course.
Yes, always.
And the, well, there used to be more
male teachers teaching the middle school than there are now.
So that the first programs would have maybe 90% men.
Now it's 90% women.
The other way around if you have a program.
Now you've been doing this all these summers since then?
From 1960 up through 96.
With a few years where I didn't have a program.
How did
Describe how it changed.
What changes were in that program during that 30 years?
Well, let me just say this.
The topics change a lot because you have to remember earth science is a field where we're finding out something new every day, particularly astronomy.
And so this keeps changing all the time.
And we started to emphasize the fact that when you teach something,
You can do it better if you've seen it.
And so that was one of the philosophies that you, in order to teach it, you have to see it.
And there has been a change in NSF towards more innovative things.
They forget that most of the teachers that are selected as these students,
by the Presidential Award for Teachers that goes on.
Most of them are products of the Summer Institute program.
Now, geographically, did you continue to draw teachers from about the same area?
Well, in the beginning, it was nationwide.
Oh.
And the last ones have been from Texas because they got to where they were more provincial.
They wanted them more provincial.
And was there a good mix between urban and rural?
Schools represented?
We took whatever the applicants were.
We didn't try to.
No, but I mean in terms of the applications.
Yeah, generally.
There was a good blend?
Yeah, there was a good mix.
Because Van Horn isn't a very big place.
What were some of the most difficult topics for you all to get across to them?
What did they understand most easily and most... Well, you always have a few people that don't believe in evolution.
Ah, okay.
And, of course, I always start off, one, I believe there is a God.
I believe that the rules for evolution are set up by the God.
Mm-hmm.
And therefore, faith is a search for the truth, and so is science.
And if we do a good job of it, relatively, we'll get to the same place.
Did you ever have anybody challenge you on that?
No.
Really?
But we have had people in our beginning of geology class, the historical one, challenge the props on it.
But see, it turned out that the fellow that started off by saying that humans were present with dinosaurs from the tracks up at Glen Rose, and I've seen those so-called human tracks,
They're just the result of water erosion.
He finally admitted that he thought they weren't human drugs either.
So that a lot of the evidence they use is... All right, so evolution is a reality in geology.
What are some other...
of the most difficult or the most discussed topics in geology in general?
Well, plate tectonics is one that most students have a little difficulty understanding.
In other words, the earth that we're on
They don't see it in three dimensions.
And essentially, we know there are segments of the earth that move.
Otherwise, we wouldn't have earthquakes.
And we get some very difficult ones.
I guess when I was doing my Ph.D.
dissertation, those were the days when I smoked.
And it's a wonder that I don't have lung cancer or this, but I've been very fortunate.
My doctor says you've got to quit smoking, so I did.
Let's talk about smoking a second.
In general, did your colleagues also smoke in those years, in the 50s and 60s?
Yes, yes.
And what were you all smoking generally?
What kinds of cigarettes?
Well, I smoked mentholated ones then.
But I also smoked cigars, smoked a pipe.
I always had something going.
And you smoked in your office?
Oh, yes.
Did any of your colleagues smoke in the classroom?
We weren't supposed to.
But did anybody do it, as far as you remember?
Clay sewer might have, I don't know.
Because I think I remember some faculty members smoking in seminars, you know, sitting at the table.
Certainly when I was a graduate student at Rice, we had some people that did that.
But I remember faculty members' offices
it was normal for there to be an ashtray everywhere.
And how many packs a day were you smoking?
Two.
No, and then the difficult thing was, after I'd quit smoking, I was in the hospital for something, and my doctor came in, the one that told me not to quit smoking.
Dwight Andres.
Andres?
Yeah, Dwight.
He just died recently.
And this is the last place he visited.
Sat down, pulled out his pipe, smoked.
Now, I sort of refused to go to a hospital
that doesn't have a non-smoking sign.
During that era, in those years here, where did you and your wife and other couples, what did you all do for relaxation and entertainment?
Where did you go to party or to eat and so forth, to relax?
Well, you remember the Grove?
I've even gone there to see movies in the summer.
In the summer.
And I remember they even put on a musical there one summer.
I don't know where they got the talent.
Where did you— Was Guyon Hall here when you— Oh, yes.
Oh, yes.
Sure.
It's in the site of the rudder building.
Well, I've even gone to see movies in Guy and Hall.
Of course, you had the core in here in Guy and Hall going to see the movie, too.
And it could be pretty noisy, couldn't it, with the core?
Yes.
And then they used to show that one.
We've never been licked.
Yes.
That would be shown about every other time there were movies, so I've seen it several times.
Where did y'all go eat if you're going to eat out, going to dine out?
Well, the Whataburger came in before McDonald's did.
Earlier in the 60s, in order, because of doing the research and the research field coming into town, I did join the country club, Briarcrest.
Okay.
So we normally— You'd take company out there.
Yeah.
And then did you ever go to the Texan?
Well, in the early days, you know, after he just decided to quit teaching physics and go to... As coeducation and integration began on the campus, how did that affect your classes?
Do you remember the early days when they were the first women and the first blacks in the fall and spring semester?
Well, I remember I had a couple of blacks, very bright too, but I don't know.
They never finished up here.
I don't know where they finished.
They were in the petroleum engineering course for geologists, so I don't know what happened to them.
In those early years, do you remember any problems black students encountered in class?
Like I never heard of any, did you?
No, I haven't either.
And I would, well,